---
layout: post
title: 21 quotes from books I read in 2021
tags: [reading]
---

This year wasn't a very good one for my writing, but I read a lot of others' writing. To that end, here's listicle of 21 good quotes from books I read this year. These are in no particular order and are not categorised. 

> This realisation – the realisation of the Insignificance of the Knowledge – came to me in the form of a Revelation. What I mean by this is that I knew it to be true before I understood why or what steps had led me there.
>
> _**Piranesi** - Susanna Clarke_


> Our minds habitually distort or ignore critical information in ways that seem, on the face of it, counterproductive.Our mental processes act in bad faith, perverting or degrading our picture of the world.
> 
> _**The Elephant in the Brain** - Kevin Simler & Robin Hanson_


> Other people have partial visibility into what we’re thinking. Faced with the translucency of our own minds, then, self-deception is often the most robust way to mislead others. 
> 
> _**The Elephant in the Brain** - Kevin Simler & Robin Hanson_


> To a person finding himself at the beginning of an era, its simple fundamental structures may become visible like a distant landscape in the flash of a single stroke of lightning. But the path toward them in the dark is long and confusing.
> 
> _**The Making of the Atomic Bomb** - Richard Rhodes_


> When you adopt a productivity mindset, however, deliberate practice-inducing tasks are often sidestepped, as the ambiguous path toward their completion, when combined with the discomfort of the mental strain they require, makes them an unpopular choice in scheduling decisions.
>
>  _**So Good They Can't Ignore You** - Cal Newport_ 


> Reason improves our social standing rather than leading us to intrinsically better decisions. And even when it leads us to better decisions, it’s mostly because we happen to be in a community that favors the right type of decisions on the issue.
>
> _**The Enigma of Reason** - Dan Sperber & Hugo Mercier_


> Listening without some degree of intimacy isn’t really listening. It’s passive and transactional rather than active and engaged. Genuine listening is a bit like driving on a rain-slicked highway. Speed kills.
>
> _**To Sell is Human** - Dan Pink_


> Each was doing what was best for the problems he was working on, but neither side made any attempt to understand what the other was doing. A popular in-house riddle described the situation: “What’s the collective noun for a group of statisticians?” “A quarrel.”
> 
> _**The Theory That Would Not Die** - Sharon McGrayne_


> During the early nineteen-twenties the commuters who left their cars at the suburban railroad station at first parked them at the edge of the station drive; then they needed a special parking lot, and pretty soon an extended parking lot, and in due course a still bigger one–and the larger the lot grew, the more people wanted to use it. New boulevards, widened roads, and parkways relieved the bottlenecks at the approaches to the big cities–and invited more and more cars to enter. At the end of the half century the question, "Where do I park?" was as annoyingly insistent
> 
> _**The Big Change** - Frederick Lewis Allen_


> Once an active commitment is made, then, self-image is squeezed from both sides by consistency pressures. From the inside, there is a pressure to bring self-image into line with action. From the outside, there is a sneakier pressure—a tendency to adjust this image according to the way others perceive us.
> 
> _**Influence** - Robert Cialdini_


> Researchers have found that merely asking people to assume their initial judgment is wrong, to seriously consider why that might be, and then make another judgment, produces a second estimate which, when combined with the first, improves accuracy almost as much as getting a second estimate from another person.
> 
> _**Superforcasting** - Philip Tetlock & Dan Gardner_


> Danger—like speed—is an experience that follows a logarithmic, ever-shallowing curve. Once you’ve been exposed to a lot of risk (and Anders had been, as a fighter pilot) then a hell of a lot of risk doesn’t seem like that much more.
> 
> _**A Man on the Moon** - Andrew Chaikin_


> Though he was virtually fearless in the physical sense, he suffered an almost pathological dread of losing control of the situation. In part, this attitude grew out of a consuming sense of responsibility. He felt he had gotten them into their situation, and it was his responsibility to get them out. As a consequence, he was intensely watchful for potential troublemakers who might nibble away at the unity of the group.
>
> _**Endurance** - Alfred Lansing_