---
layout: post
title: Optimising the alphabet
description: Improving the information density of the alphabet
summary: Improving the information density of the alphabet
tags: [data, language]
photoloc: /assets/posts/letters/
---

A common urban legend states that the QWERTY was designed so slow typists down to prevent typing, but in reality the opposite was true.

### Efficiency in Language Design
- Braille
- Morse code

I propose we cut out the middle man and do this with the latin alphabet. Morse code assigns the simplest symbols to the most frequent letters: a single dot is assigned to E, the most frequent, a single dash to T, the second-most frequent, and so on. What we need to do is order the letters in the latin alphabet by their simplicity (or complexity).

- Assuming that:
    - It takes the same amount of time to enter any letter, i.e. more complex letters don't take longer to write (we're typing on keyboards, not handwriting)
    - We're not new to the latin alphabet (even if you're new to English itself)
    - Reading is done at the level of letters, rather than words (this is a very false assumption)

### ETAOIN SHRDLU

Alfred Vail, who expanded on the original code, estimated letter frequency in English by counting the amount of moveable type in type-cases of a local newspaper. We now have a larger reference set to calculate letter frequency in English, but the mapping still used in (American) Morse code wasn't too far off.

It was important for transmission speed in Morse code that the letters used most often were those that are quickest to enter. One dot for ```e```, one dash for ```t```, and so on.

The common mnemonic for letter frequency in English is shown above -

### Letter Complexity

There are two key of characteristics when it comes to letter identification: Complexity, and distinctiveness.
For symbols in the latin alphabet, **complexity** is measured by the number of features of a given letter. There are 10 distinct features, as shown in the diagram below.  

{% include article_pic.html
   file="Features Diagram.png"
   caption="The 10 features of a letter. Click the diagram to expand."
%}

By counting the number of features in each letter, we can rank them by complexity. The most complex letter is ```m```, with all its intersections and terminators. The least complex letter is ```l```, obviously.

Clarifications:
- Looking at lowercase letter shapes, because they're more commonly used.
- It depends on fonts, counting features of Arial.


We could re-assign the letters in the alphabet.

### Distinctiveness

**Distinctiveness** measures the difference between letters; you need to see fewer features of a distinct letter to rule out other possible letters.
The most distinct letter is ```o```. It only has four features. By the time you've seen three of the curves, you can rule out most of the other letters in the alphabet except for ```e``` and ```g```.

Similarity between letters can be calculated as the ratio of shared features to the total number of features in one of the letters. The order of comparison is important:
- ```a``` is **60%** similar to ```b```
- ```b``` is **86%** similar to ```a``` (because ```a``` has more features).

### Two-Handedness

Another improvement we can make to the mapping of letters is alternating them between the left and right hand on the keyboard.

<blockquote class="quoteback" darkmode="" data-title="Wikipedia" data-author="QWERTY" cite="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/QWERTY">
                      Alternating hands while typing is a desirable trait in a keyboard design. While one hand types a letter, the other hand can prepare to type the next letter, making the process faster and more efficient.
                      <footer>QWERTY <cite><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/QWERTY">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/QWERTY</a></cite></footer>
</blockquote>
<script note="" src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/Blogger-Peer-Review/quotebacks@1/quoteback.js"></script>

(please ignore all printed examples of the English language for now...)


{% include article_pic.html
   file="Keyboard.png"
   caption="The letters assigned to each hand on a QWERTY keyboard."
%}

To help ensure we have as many alternating letters as possible, we want to look at [bigrams](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bigram) (two-letter sequences). The top 10 most common bigrams are as follows:
1. TH
2. HE
3. IN
4. ER
5. AN
6. RE
7. ON
8. AT
9. EN
10. ND



### New mapping

We can use a [pangram](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pangram) as a test phrase. They're probably not the best test cases to use, as they're not really representative of English letter frequency. English sentences typically don't include every letter in the alphabet.

Here's the most familiar one:

> The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.

Re-mapping based on complexity (least complex → most frequent):

> Apm vdkhi ygtzx odnjf tcrg apm bklu qte.

Re-mapping based on distinctiveness (most distinct → most frequent):

> Adm sqhxv iutjn ztc lqgyr temu adm bkop ftw.

I've made a translator: [daayr://ymnituamu.xtg/fhrahnxa_bmaamur](/distinct_letters)

### References

1. [Features for identification of uppercase and lowercase letters](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/23657364_Features_for_Identification_of_Uppercase_and_Lowercase_Letters) (Fiset et al., 2008)
2. [From complexity to distinctiveness: The effect of expertise on letter perception](https://link.springer.com/article/10.3758/s13423-018-1550-6) (Wiley and Rapp, 2018)
3. [English Letter Frequency Counts](http://norvig.com/mayzner.html)
