---
layout: post
title: History is really dense
tags: [history]
---

History is really dense. One of the things I think about a lot is what people living in the past thought about day to day. What did they stress about? What did they waste time doing? Why did they build huge stone towers?

## Stone Towers of Bologna

I read the other day about the [Stone Towers of Bologna](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Towers_of_Bologna).
Between the 12th and 13th century, Bologna was full of stone towers nearly 100 m[^1] tall. The reason for the construction of so many towers is still not clear, but it seems like they were probably built as competition between rich families. Artists' impressions of Bologna at the time almost resemble a modern-day city. 


## Orthographic History

Most of the time we think about history chronologically. A while back event A lead to event B, which caused event C, and boy did that cause trouble during event D. But sometimes it's more interesting to look perpendicularly: take a slice of time and look at what was going on across the world. What else was happening in Italy while the Bolognese[^2] were building spaghetti-shaped towers?

### Meanwhile in 13th Centuryn Italy

Several things:
- Fibonacci's [*Liber Abaci*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liber_Abaci) first appears, advocating the use of the Hindu-Arabic numberal system (i.e. the numbers we use now) in place of Roman numberals.
- The Republic of Venice is formed soon after the city signs a trade agreement with the newly-appointed Great Khan of the Mongols: Genghis Khan.
- Francis of Assisi founds the Francsican Order


This is probably going to end up being a collection of Wikipedia links. 

### 1200 BC

**[Sea Peoples](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sea_Peoples)**: Pirates of unknown origin that terrorised the ancient Egyptians during the Late Bronze Age. They are one of the purported causes of the [Late Bronze Age collapse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Late_Bronze_Age_collapse).

### 1200 BCE
**[Stone Towers of Bologna](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Towers_of_Bologna)**: Between the 12th and 13th century, Bologna was full of stone towers up to 97m tall. The reason for the construction of so many towers is still not clear. Artists' impressions of Bologna at the time almost resemble a modern-day city.  


[^1]: About 330 feet.
[^2]: It would be more locally appropriate to call them [tagliatelle shaped](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bologna#Cuisine.)