---
layout: post
title: Box Error, a.k.a. Dichotomania
tags: [notes, psychology]
---

Brains are wired to simplify cognition wherever possible. Energy is scarce, therefore brain power is scarce.
To this end, humans can't help but categorise. Storing a finite number of discrete values is much easier than storing all values along a spectrum. Finer granularity leads to more accuracy at the cost of computational power.

Box Error comes from [*Human Transit* by Jarrett Walker](../../books/human-transit).

> Sometimes, we’re tempted to think about a spectrum as though it were a series of box-like categories.

Walker talks about the role of the expert (in this case a transit consultant) as asking clarifying questions so that the community can understand its expectations. These questions are often open-ended. Responses should fall on a spectrum with extreme outcomes on either end. But Walker notes that responses to these clarifying questions are often bucketed for simplicity, and that people are not confortable with considering their response as part of a spectrum of possible responses.

> If you already know where you are on a question, it can feel threatening for me to point out that there is a spectrum of credible opinions and that there are other possible valid positions on that spectrum.

{% include quote.html 
  content="If you already know where you are on a question, it can feel threatening for me to point out that there is a spectrum of credible opinions and that there are other possible valid positions on that spectrum." 
  title="Human Transit" 
  author="Jarett Walker"
  link="../../books/human-transit"
%}

<blockquote class="quoteback" darkmode="" data-title="Deterministic%20thinking%20(%E2%80%9Cdichotomania%E2%80%9D)%3A%20a%20problem%20in%20how%20we%20think%2C%20not%20just%20in%20how%20we%20act%20%7C%20Statistical%20Modeling%2C%20Causal%20Inference%2C%20and%20Social%20Science" data-author="" cite="https://statmodeling.stat.columbia.edu/2019/09/13/deterministic-thinking-dichotomania/">
But I’d argue, with Eric Loken, that inappropriate discretization is not just a problem with <em>statistical practice</em>; it’s <a href="https://statmodeling.stat.columbia.edu/2019/02/15/more-on-that-horrible-statistical-significance-grid/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">also a problem</a> with <em>how people think</em>, that the idea of things being on or off is “actually the internal working model for a lot of otherwise smart scientists and researchers.”
<footer> <cite><a href="https://statmodeling.stat.columbia.edu/2019/09/13/deterministic-thinking-dichotomania/">https://statmodeling.stat.columbia.edu/2019/09/13/deterministic-thinking-dichotomania/</a></cite></footer>
</blockquote>
<script note="" src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/Blogger-Peer-Review/quotebacks@1/quoteback.js"></script>