---
layout: post
title: Should NBA players intentionally miss free throws?
tags: [nba, data, python]
photoloc: /assets/posts/freethrows
---

## Background
Should bad FT% players brick the second free throw intentionally, aiming to get the rebound and end up with the ball in the middle of the lane? You would only have to get the rebound around XX% of the time for it to be more efficient than shooting, depending on how bad the player is.

Key question is: How good could a player be at intentionally getting the free throw to miss off the front of the rim, straight back to them?  

> Yao Ming apparently used to do this all the time

## Examples
- Luka Doncic (Mavs) against the Knicks (2023-01-27)
- Donovan Mitchell (Cavs) against the Bulls (2023-01-02)
- Steven Adams (Thunder) against the Rockets (2017-04-23)


## Examples from the 2022-23 season
I found about a dozen good examples from the current season, which I've compiled into a video. 

## NBA API
We can use the Python package [nba_api](https://github.com/swar/nba_api) to get the play-by-play data.

## Measuring Possessions

{% include article_pic.html
   file="possessions.png"
   caption="How many ways can a possession end?"
%}

### How to end a possession
- Made shot  
	- `EVENTMSGTYPE = 1`  
- Missed shot w/ opponent rebound:  
	- `EVENTMSGTYPE = 2` followed by  
	- `EVENTMSGTYPE = 4` with a different `PLAYER1_TEAM_ID`  
- Turnover  
	- `EVENTMSGTYPE = 5`  
- End of quarter  
	- `EVENTMSGTYPE = 13`  

### Possession efficiency
How to measure the efficiency of a possession once you know where the possession starts?  

- It also has to be compared to the average efficient of a free throw in the NBA, which I'm guessing is very high. You'd have to be awful at free throw shooting for this to make sense or out of time basically.  
- And maybe compared to a typical offensive rebound efficiency?  
- Measuring this as points per possession as "efficiency"  

### Free throw offensive rebounds
We're looking for the efficiency of possessions after there a last free throw (`EVENTMSGACTIONTYPE = 12`) is followed by a rebound (`EVENTMSGTYPE = 4`), both with the same `PLAYER1_ID`. 
After that we can dig down and look at clutch situations only (if there are enough examples...)  

Two situations:
- The FT shooter get the rebound and pull it back out for another full possession
- The FT shooter immediately puts the shot up

## Results
Over the last 5 years, there have been 271 possesions where a player collects their own rebound and immediately shoots. Those plays have scored 1.20 points per possession. The year-by-year efficiency obviously fluctuates as it's a fairly small sample size each year, but ranges between 1.05 and 1.24 PPP. 


NBA league average FT shooting is 78%, which means these plays need to have a success rate of about 93% to be more efficient that a typical free throw. For really bad shooters (with career average FT% < 60%), this success rate drops down even more to 72%.

This is probably the most difficult question to answer as part of this analysis: what is a reasonable rate of success for these plays?

A lot of teams don't box out the shooter (at least in these examples), leaving them wide open to pick up a long rebound. Even so, if done correctly, it'd be hard to get in front of the shooter to box them out before the ball has come all the way back. Especially for taller players who are often going to be getting boxed out by a wing, i.e. normally the 3rd smallest player on the opposing team.

## Qualifying Players